---
layout: post
title:  "DCVC"
subtitle: "Nicolau-approved"
date:   2024-12-21 12:00:00 +1000
author: "Stephen Franzese"
categories: work-up
tag: work-up
---

DCVC (dry column vacuum chromatography) is essentially a variation of the standard 'flash' column chromatography that uses finer silica to achieve better resolution and separation. It is a very broad label and the exact process used can be varied depending on your situation. Essentially, the DCVC silica is packed into a fritted filter funnel (what I often just call a frit) which has a vacuum spout. The solvent is then pulled through the column by vacuum rather than being pushed down by nitrogen like it is in a flash column.

There are two ends of the DCVC 'spectrum': plugs and columns. In the 'plug' style (what I refer to as a short silica plug), the silica acts as essentially a large piece of filter paper whereby insoluble solids or polar impurities will remain stuck to the upper layers while the desired material will elute. I use this style a lot when I purify Suzukis, particularly to remove palladium black. The 'column' style is more like typical column chromatography where you try to separate out several bands and collect each one as a fraction, varying the solvent gradient incrementally for each fraction. You can sort of blend these two forms together or switch between the two. Provided you don't have more than two spots of interest that are extremely close together, which should be (hopefully) most of the time, you can do a sort of "enhanced plug": you get separation by using different solvents at different times (e.g. starting with pet. spirits to encourage one band to elute and then working up to a more polar solvent) and then just flush it out while the other stuff stays behind. Or you can do it more column-like if there is no clear and precise separation: collecting fractions and varying the gradient incrementally per fraction. In this form, you collect every wash of the solvent, since each fraction will posibly contain some product which you can confirm by TLC. The difficult part is knowing when to do what, but it is a skill you learn by doing.

The most important feature, other than the use of finer silica, is that the column can run dry with little-to-no repercussions. This makes changing solvents easier since you can let the column run entirely dry before switching, but also because you can make larger changes in solvent polarity/ratios without the column cracking.

Nicolau typically used a 60 mL fritted filter funnel which was about 6-7 cm tall from the frit. He'd pack it up with DCVC silica until it had a height of about 5 cm. The exact height doesn't matter as long as there's space for your loaded substrate and a bit extra empty space to pool solvent on top. This is about 20-25 g of silica if you choose to weigh it out (please don't weigh outside the fumehood. Bring the top-loading balance into the fumehood). Make sure to tap the sides of the frit to get the silica to lie flat and pull the vacuum to get it compressed. Once the vacuum is on you can tamp it down with a teflon rod.

Then, place a circle of filter paper on top (you may need to cut it to fit right) and pour in 50-100 mL of pet. spirits all at once under vacuum, and let it pull through until the meniscus is just about to reach the top of the filter paper. Stop the vacuum and pull off the hose, but be careful with pulling the hose to quickly as you might disturb the silica on the frit from the sudden inrush of atmospheric pressure. I like to collect the pet. spirits and reuse it (I keep a bottle explicitly for packing silica). If you are wet-loading, add the compound dissolved in solvent now. If you are dry-loading, remove the filter paper with some tweezers and leave it aside and add the silica with the crude sample adsorbed. For a frit this size, don't use less than 2 g or it won't cover the frit properly and the elution will be uneven. Put the filter paper on top again. Add ~50-100 mL of pet. spirits and once that has eluted, pull the vacuum again. Now you can start the DCVC proper as described above.

For Nicolau, this setup worked for purifying 200-500 mg of crude dry-loaded onto 2 g of flash silica with an R<sub>f</sub> difference of 0.05-0.1 between the two spots, with the spots having an R<sub>f</sub> around 0.3. For larger R<sub>f</sub> differences, it's easier to separate more crude: up to ~2 g of crude loaded onto three times the mass of flash silica (avoid using less than three times the mass of silica, otherwise there may not be enough silica surface area to adsorb all the crude). If you need a bigger column, use a 125 mL fritted filter funnel, which can fit around 50-60 g of silica. This is typically best suited for a DCVC with around 1-5 g of crude depending (again) on the separation needed. For anything larger, you should consider alternative purification techniques (e.g. recrystallisation).

I'll discuss the difference between dry- and wet-loading elsewhere, but dry-loading on flash silica is usually the best choice. This helps retain polar impurities and palladium crud on the baseline, which is often what we need given we start from small, polar compounds and make large, less polar ones. This does generally come with a sacrifice in resolution, though, because a band eluted off loaded silica will typically be thicker than the band achievable for a same amount of material loaded on celite. If you have a difficult separation, then loading on celite may help. Unfortunately you need to use quite a lot of celite (I've heard at least ten times the mass of crude is desirable), and the height of the celite layer will likely be comparable to the height of the silica used in the column, so you may need a longer filter funnel.

Nicolau tended to keep the column wet even though DCVC allows you to let it run it dry. This is because bands eluting off the column become distorted in the last half centimetre  or so, right where the packed silica contacts the glass frit with a vacuum on the other side. This is a bit of an engineering issue rather than a chemical one, and I don't know how to fully avoid it. A column which is fully wetted (like in flash chromatography) doesn't suffer from this as much, but one which dries with every fraction can compound this issue, leading to bent bands where the areas closest to the walls elute faster than the bands in the middle. This is something you will notice if you elute a highly coloured band: you can see how it stains different areas of the underside of the frit in stages as you're running the column. Even so, letting the column run dry will generally not ruin your separation and it will likely make the process much more convenient.

Also, if you're doing a purification with coloured bands and you know for sure what band you want, then don't bother collecting fractions until your material is about to come out, at which point you can choose to either collect it whole as a single fraction of obtain multiple fractions just in case there's a less obvious impurity partially coeluting with it. There's just no point to collection fractions you'll know you'll discard anyway, unless you plan to characterize the byproduct or impurity. Consider yourself lucky whenever you can follow your band on a column with visible light or a 365 nm torch as this is not the general case. If you can't see your product, you will have to collect dozens of fractions blindly instead and then do TLCs to check the fractions for product.

DCVC is harder to master than flash, but there is a lot you can play around with and so you can often manipulate things to get the best separation whereas flash really only has two options: isocratic and gradient elution. It is because of this that Nicolau was such a DCVC evangelist who scorned flash chromatography. I am a bit more ambivalent, but it really is just a matter of careful planning and decision making. You may need to do a lot of TLCs before starting a column of any sort and you need to think about which method will better suit your situation.

Have fun, don't die,\
Stephen