---
layout: post
title:  "Preparing NMR Samples"
date:   2024-06-02 23:00:00 +1000
author: "Stephen Franzese"
categories: general
tags: general, NMR
---

An NMR will only give meaningful data if the sample is prepared properly.

The first step is weighing your sample. Get a vial (one large enough for you to fit a spatula in and that can hols a few millilitres of solvent) and put it onto the scale. Tare the scale and weigh out ~20 mg of your sample into the vial (if it is a lquid, pipette it in).

I have a special pipette with a line drawn on it in pen to mark roughly half a millilitre of solvent. I use this pipette exclusively for NMR solvents and I make sure it never touches anything other than solvent. To make one, measure out 0.5 mL of solvent, draw it into the pipette and then mark the line. I just copied mine from Nicolau's old one by holding it next to his and drawing the line at the same point, so I don't actually know how he made his. If yours gets dirtied, you can just do this copying to make a new one; the volume measured is not meant to be precise.

Before adding a solvent, it is wise to check the solubility of your compound using the non-deuterated form. I would, however, not test DMSO because you will not be getting your sample back easily. You should ideally have a sense of your compound's solubility based on the solvents you have used for the reaction and work-up. If an NMR already exists in the literature for your compound, use the NMR solvent used for that spectrum (unless it is one you don't have) because it will make comparisons easier. It is also wise to consider _what_ you are expecting to see in the spectrum. If you want to see an OH or NH peak, then don't use methanol-d4, because it can exchange its D<sup>+</sup> with the compound's H<sup>+</sup>. Similarly, CDCl<sub>3</sub> can cause the same problem if it has generated DCl (which acts just like HCl), though this is avoided if your purify your chloroform-d by passing through basic alumina or if you buy chloroform-d that comes with a piece of silver foil (which prevents the DCl from forming). Another issue is if the solvent peak might obscure your compound's peaks, which is particularly common with chloroform-d and aromatic compounds. Usually this is not too big a deal, but it is worth being aware of it. If you do not know what solvent to use, try CDCl<sub>3</sub> first because you can easily get it to evaporate (I'll explain how later). DMSO-d6 is almost always going to work, but it's not something you can easily undo adding. Acetonitrile-d3 is perhaps a wiser choice than DMSO-d6 if you really do not want to lose any product whatsoever. MeOD is good for very polar compounds and acetone-d6 is a strong solvent, but both are sold in ampules because they are so hygroscopic, meaning it is better to save them for when you are truly desperate. If you open an ampule, place any unused solvent into a small vial and seal it with parafilm. If you are careful, you can often manage two NMRs from a 1 mL ampule.

Use your deuterate pipette to pick up your NMR solvent. Please make sure you don't leave the NMR solvent bottle open for long since chloroform is volatile and most other common deuterates are hygroscopic. Pipette the solvent into the vial. If you used a volatile solvent (e.g. chloroform or acetone), you can just blow the pipeete dry with an air gun or place it somewhere safe in the fumehood to evaporate and it will be fine to reuse by the next time you need it. If you used something that's much less volatile (DMSO, heavy water), then rinse with (normal) acetone and blow dry. Be careful not to get acetone on the marked line or it will wash away.

Get a second glass pipette and use it to agitate the solution: pick up and push out the sample until it is well dissolved. If your sample is not dissolving there are a few options:
1. Try another solvent. If you have added chloroform-d already, try adding a drop of methanol-d4. This often works quite well. If this also fails, evaporate out the solvent and just try another one (or prepare a completely new sample).
2. If the product is mostly dissolved, you can just filter the solid particles out. Get a second pipette and place a piece of cotton wool inside of it. You only need a tiny piece. Push it down using another pipette (a long one) or a piece of wire. Hold your pipette with the tip inside the NMR tube and drop your solution into the pipette with the cotton wool. Let it drip through. The cotton wool will soak up solvent, so you may need to rinse it out with a bit more (using your NMR solvent pipette for this).
3. Sonicate the vial to see if this helps. Make sure the vial is sealed first though.
4. This is getting a bit desperate, but you can try adding a droplet of a non-deuterated solvent you know your compound is soluble in which is miscible with your deuterated solvent. Be sure it does not show peaks in the same region as your compound or it will drown them out completely (e.g. no toluene for aromatics).
5. Get a fancy/uncommon deuterate if your compound is insoluble in everything else. This is the stage where you reach for the stuff like benzene or order something like pyridine-d5.\
You may also consider running the NMR at a higher temperature, but that is not in the scope of this guide.

Once your sample is dissolved, drop it into the NMR tube. If you only used 0.5 mL you should have a perfect volume for NMR. I have two lines marked on my NMR sample holder (which is just an old plastic container): one that indicates 4 cm and another 1 cm above that for 5 cm. If your sample in the NMR tube is between 4 and 5 cm (measured from the bottom of the tube), then it should be good. Do check with the person in charge of your NMR facility first just in case though. Add the solution slowly and stop when you reach that range. If you're below the line, pick up some more solvent (with your deuterate pipette) and add it in till you have ebough.

Next, cap your NMR tube. Make sure it is on tight, especially if the NMR machine uses a robot to insert the NMR tubes. At the top of the tube (or on the cap if it's got a flat top) write your initials, your sample name and the solvent you used. You will forget what is in the NMR tube eventually: do not trust your memory. Make sure you keep the writing close to the top so it doesn't affect the NMR or get onto the thing the tube is held in when the NMR is run (I don't know what to call it, but the idea is the ink could smear on it and then they'd need to clean the holder thing otherwise it'll get on everyone else's tubes).

If you have prepared a light-sensitive product, cover the tube in foil while you transport it to and from the NMR machine.

If you want to collect your sample and you used a volatile solvent, first clean off the label with acetone. Then, pour it out into a vial, rinsing with an appropriate volatile solvent (probably chloroform). Hold the vial in place in your fumehood with a clamp (or put it in a microwave vial heating block). Next, attach a needle to your Schlenk line and hold it in place with a clamp such that the needle will blow into the vial. Position it fairly high up in case the flow of nitrogen is too strong. Turn on the nitrogen and adjust the distance of the needle and the nitrogen flow until it is strong enough that you can see the liquid being disturbed by it, but not too strong that it sprays about. You can lower the needle further as the solvent level decreases if you need to, but it should be fine to just set it and leave it to do its thing. Eventually, the solvent will have all evaporated. Bear in mind that samples dried this way will be difficult to scrape from the vial because they will typically form a thin, glassy layer. It may be easier to collect it by re-dissolving in solvent. This might sound stupid because you just worked to get rid of solvent, but sometimes you need a sample in a different solvent (e.g. for UV-vis spectroscopy or mass spec).

And once you are done with your NMR sample completely, be sure to [clean it out](https://stephen13f.github.io/general/2024/04/12/washing.html).

Have fun; don't dirty your solvent pipette.\
Stephen