---
layout: post
title:  "Flash Chromatography"
subtitle: "Nicolau hates this"
date:   2025-01-20 22:05:00 +1000
author: "Stephen Franzese"
categories: work-up
tags: work-up chromatography
---
Flash chromatography (aka column chromatography) is the thing everyone means when they say they hate chromatography. It is notoriously finnicky and difficult, with columns taking ten times as long as you expect and affording you product that is still impure.

A lot of this is due to bad technique, but it is still rather annoying to do a column.

You see, if you plan correctly and have a product that's not contaminated with five different, poorly-separating impurities, a column is easy. The other important thing to note is that a column with decent separation will always afford you some amount of pure product if you make your fractions small enough. This is not always feasible but it's worth pointing out. Flash chromatography will almost always work, perhaps not well, but you should get at least slightly purer product afterwards.

Unless the TLC shows good separation or the lit procedure says to use it, flash is not usually my go-to technique. If anything, it's more of a last resort. However, it is extremely popular so you should know how to do it.

I should also note that Nicolau hates flash chromatography and if he were here he'd tell you to do [dry column vacuum chromatography](https://stephen13f.github.io/work-up/2024/12/21/DCVC.html) instead.

<h1>How to Run a Column</h1>

I mostly follow a procedure based on a document ([here](https://labs.chem.ucsb.edu/zakarian/armen/how-to-do-flash-column-3.pdf)) a former labmate gave me. The document itself was written by the Zakarian group of the University of California, Santa Barbara and it worked well on at least one occasion, so I have stuck with it since.

The basic set up of the glassware is as follows: a long fritted column with a stopcock is held up vertically. The top of the column has a joint which you can use to attach an adapter connected to a nitrogen line. When attached, the nitrogen will flow through and push down on the solvent in the column to force it through the silica. Make sure to secure the adapter with a clip or it will pop off when you turn on the flow.

<h2>Eluent Selection</h2>

The first step is to decide what solvent you will use. This is the hard part. In my solvent posts I make some suggestions about chromatography solvents, but the fact is you can pretty much use any and any mixture if it gives good separation.

Flash chromatography will work well if your product has an R<sub>f</sub> of about 0.3. If the compound is more polar, up to 0.5 is fine. If it is a low-polar compound, it is better to aim for closer to 0.2. If your compound has an R<sub>f</sub> that's really high and good separation, your wasting your time with a column and you should just do a [short silica plug](https://stephen13f.github.io/work-up/2024/12/21/DCVC.html).

While it would be ideal to have a large separation of your product from the impurities on the TLC plate, due to the way column chromatography works, it may not be strictly necessary (within reason, that is). I think the reason you want a fairly low R<sub>f</sub> is that the separation will work better the longer the product remains in the column (up to a point, that is). There are a lot of nuances and complicated factors when it comes to chromatography so I will stick to what I actually know and what I usually do.

My first solvent mixture to try is 1:1 ethyl acetate/petroleum spirits. This usually works quite well. If the separation is poor, I'll try 100% pet. spirits and judge from there. If the product spot's separation is worse (e.g. stuck to the baseline or running away with the eluent), I'll judge what to do based on that change relative to 50%. For example, if at 50% the spot was too fast and at 100% it's too slow, then I'd try 25% ethyl acetate in pet. spirits. The easiest way to prepare these solvent mixes is to get a large measuring cylinder and pour in 200 mL of one solvent and then add the second solvent until the total volume is 400 mL. This can then be poured into a Schott bottle. The lid is then screwed on and the bottle shaken to mix them properly. You can change the quantities to match the correct concentration, but I typically keep a bottle of 50% EtOAc/pet. spirits handy and this can be diluted to get 25% EtOAc by mixing 200 mL of the 50% solvent with pure pet. spirits (or you get 75% by using EtOAc).

There are other popular solvent mixtures, but this one is by far the safest and easiest to work with. For very polar substances, pure DCM or methanol in DCM is quite popular, particularly for high-polar or very stubborn compounds. I'd start with 1% methanol first and work from there. If your compound is eluting too quickly, reduces the concentration of methanol. You shouldn't use more than 10% methanol and trying to use more is very unlikely to improve separation. Methanol is very, very polar and so large concentrations will probably just flush everything through. There is also the risk of the silica 'shedding' when you use DCM/methanol mixtures. This is not a very big issue, but I think it usually manifests as a thin white surface on the bottom of your evaporated flasks which you might notice in the fractions which seem to be just solvent by TLC. I would probably suggest  dissolving it in a different solvent and filtering it with a nylon filter. Silica is not soluble in organic solvents.

Another favourite is toluene. Toluene is generally used pure and it often gives great separation. There are some issues with it, the most notable being it absorbs UV light. This will make it difficult to observe your compound on a TLC unless all of the toluene has evaporated. It also means you cannot use a UV light to monitor the progression of a colourless but UV absorbing compound in the column. Toluene is also a little harder to evaporate than most other solvents.

Most medium- to low-polar solvents (chloroform, diethyl ether) can be used with flash. THF I would advise against because it often gives very streaky spots, but you can try it if you'te desperate. Sometimes a small amount of a polar solvent (e.g. acetone) can help with separation or streaking issues. Make sure you avoid solvents that are hard to remove (e.g. DMSO, water), highly toxic (e.g. benzene), expensive or reactive/unstable and above all, make sure your solvent mixes do not contain incompatible solvents (e.g. ones that react together, that are immiscible or which form high-boiling azeotropes).

As a final comment, there are two ways you can run a column: isocratic elution or gradient elution. In isocratic you use only one solvent or solvent mixture and just keep adding it until the column is done. In gradient elution, you slowly change the solvent or the ratio of solvent during the progression of the column. I advise against gradient elution for a number of reasons. The main one being that it is difficult. If you change the polarity of the eluent too quickly, you will get parts of the column heating up and this causes 'cracking': the silica looks like it forms cracks, ruining the tight packing and causing issues in the elution. This can be avoided by changing the fractions in small increments. The exact definition of 'small' depends on the solvents and I don't exactly know myself. I tend to add the next solvent mixture while there is still a decent amount in the top of the column, thus making an in-between concentration. I've also heard of people spraying acetone on their columns to cool them down and avoid cracking, but this feels like a very desperate thing to do and I am not advising you do it. The other issue is that the flash column must remain wet AT ALL TIMES. If the column dries it will crack. This means you must have the different gradients prepared before you start and must be constantly vigilant and make the changes while some solvent is still in the column. It becomes quite tense to say the least.

The idea behind gradient elution is that at a low polarity you can get good separation, but poor elution: the compounds will separate, but won't move very fast through the actual column, meaning you'd get pure product but after using litres and litres of solvent over hours. By increasing the polarity, you increase the elution speed at the risk of getting some impurities also eluting faster, but if the separation using th elow polarity was good enough then the bands shouldn't mix back together. The other way it can be useful is if one impurity elutes quickly in one solvent, but your product doesn't move at all, but in a different solvent mix your product does elute but at the same rate as the impurity. By using the gradient you can wash out the fast-running impurity and then, once it is gone, flush out your product. If gradient elution seems like it would work for your product, I suggest you try [dry vacuum column chromatography](https://stephen13f.github.io/work-up/2024/12/21/DCVC.html) instead. It is a lot easier since the column can run dry, thus you can make sharp polarity changes since there is no risk of cracking.

<h2>Column Length, Diameter and Fraction Size</h2>

If you follow the above R<sub>f</sub> guidelines, you should be using a little over 15 cm of silica, measuring from the glass frit to the top of the silica. Columns that are too short will give you poor separation, while longer ones can lead to band broadening and it can also just take ages for your column to run. If the separation is absolute garbage and you think a massive column will work, go ahead and try but I do not have high hopes.

The diameter of the column (you can measure this by holding a ruler in front of the column rather than trying to look at it from above) and the size of the fractions you collect depend on the scale of the reaction:

| Scale                 | <50 mg    | 50-300 mg | 0.3-1 g| 1-5 g | >5 g |
| :--: |  :--: | :--: | :--: | :--: |
|  Column diameter (mm) |   10      |   20      |  25    | 50    | 70   |
| Fraction volume (mL)  |    1      | 4         |   7    | 12    | 20   |

Fraction size refers to the volume of eluted solvent-compound mixture you collect. You keep collecting fractions until your compound is fully eluted or you run out of test tubes (or anything else you have on hand to collect fractions). By following the guidelines, it is expected that your compound should elute between fractions 5 and 15, but that's a very rough guide and I don't pay it much heed. I'll discuss when to stop your column later.

<h2>Setting up the Column</h2>

You can pack a column two ways. Either you add the silica dry or you mix it up with pet. spirits and pour it in as a slurry. I prefer to do it dry since it's easier to measure out and less messy. Make sure to use a funnel and never use silica outside the fume hood. Clean away silica dust with water or a damp paper towel and throw all waste silica in the silica waste bucket. Once you've added the silica, tap the sides of the column to ensure the surface is level.

The document I referred to said to add sand to the base of the frit, but I don't bother. I do add a layer of sand (approximately 1-1.5 cm) to the top. The sand on the top will protect the silica from being disturbed when you pour solvent in. You can add it after you add the product or before. I think after is better in some respects, especially if you're dry-loading, since it also gives a bit of a barrier to ensure the product doesn't mix too much up when you add the eluent.

After adding the silica, pour in pure petroleum spirits and push it through with nitrogen. The document above says to first use pure ethyl acetate, but I don't typically bother with that. The purpose of this initial pet. spirits wash is to pack the column tightly. Once pet. spirits have gone through the full column, ensure there is still some left in the top, remove the nitrogen and replace it with a glass stopper to avoid the column drying out. You can catch the eluted pet. spirits and save it so you can reuse it next time you flush a column.

Now, to prepare your sample. I always find I make a mess of things and use too much solvent when wet-loading, so I strongly advise you dry-load. If you decide to wet load, try to use the same solvent as your eluent. If you can't get it to dissolve easily in the eluent (you want to use as little solvent as possible), you can try a differrent solvent but it should be less polar than your eluent. Personally, if I couldn't dissolve it I'd just dry-load. I will explain dry-loading in a different post since it's quite a process. The solvent volume you use should ideally end up being about the size you want the band to be when you put it in the column. If it is too big, your band will be too broad and your separation will be poor. In the event you chose to wet load and ended up using too much solvent, you can try gently blowing on it with nitrogen after you add it into the column (use a needle connected to the nitrogen line, not the adapter for the column), but this will only work if the solvent is sufficiently volatile.

Before adding your compound, the final step I do is to wash the column with the eluent. You do the same thing you did with the pet. spirits but using your eluent instead. Once this is done, add your compound (and he sand if you didn't add it before. Actually you can add a second layer of sand on top of the first if you want since it doesn't have any real impact). If you wet-loaded, blow nitrogen through the column until your compound has reached the silica layer before you add any more eluent. If you add your eluent too soon, your compound will get dissolved in that and you will have a massive band to say the least.

And now, the column begins properly. Add your eluent, open the stopcock and attach the nitrogen. The nitrogen flow should be consistent, but not too strong or too weak as it can lead to the band's shape being distorted. The solvent can be added with a special funnel that has four holes in the bottom and ensures it is spread evenly in a way that won't disturb the sand/silica too much. This funnel has a much slower flow rate than a normal one, so please add the solvent into it slowly or the column will overflow and the funnel will still be full and you will get solvent all over yourself. I speak from experience. Add a little at a time, wait and then once the funnel has emptied, judge how much more you need and pour it in.

If your compound is coloured, you can collect large fractions in rbfs until you see your product's band approach about 5 cm from the frit. If it is UV absorbing, shine a UV torch on it to monitor it. If it is neither coloured nor UV absorbing, you should simply collect small fractions in test tubes from the start. Using test tubes no matter what is always the safest  option, it's just a matter of making sure you have enough. Once your product's band is near the frit (i.e. 5 cm away), you should be using test tubes to collect fractions (the suggested volumes are in the table above, but they  are a rough guide and often I change the size of the fractions depending on if I expect there to be product or not). If you use very small fractions, you are almost guaranteed to get at least one with pure product. This is why you should use quite small fractions when possible, particularly  at the beginning and end of bands, as a small amount of an impurity may be lingering before or after your product elutes. I suggest you number your test tubes. You can number the just first one from each row to save time. Continue collecting fractions even after you think you've collected all your product. I typically just keep going until I run out of test tubes.

Close the stopcock when you're changing test tubes to avoid dripping product. The column can handle being closed with nitrogen flowing, but try to not keep it shut like this for too long. If you need to pause the column, it is OK as long as it is still wet. Just close the stopcock, remove the nitrogen and replace it with a stopper.

Once you have completed the column, close it up. You can clean it properly later. The first thing to do is check you did manage to get your product out. Take the numbered test tubes and run a TLC with each fraction as a separate spot (e.g. fractions 5, 9, 13, 17, 21). Some test tubes you can exclude if you are certain they contain no product, but it's better to be safe than sorry. Run the TLCs using the solvent mixture you used for the column and determine which frations contain product by comparing with the pre-column TLC. Using this you can narrow down the range (e.g. if only spots 5 and 9 show product, we know everything from 13 onwards is useless). Do not throw away fractions until you have collected your product just in case you need them. Next, do TLCs using the fractions around the range you have already tested (e.g. 1-4, 6-8, 10-13). If a fraction is between two others which both have pure product (e.g. 6-8 in this example if 5 and 9 are pure) then you can assume it is also pure. You will likely find some spots are slightly impure. These can be discarded (unless you are really desperate) because you should have made the fractions small enough that you won't be losing much product.

Once you have determined your pure product fractions, combine them into an rbf, making sure to thoroughly rinse the test tubes out. Evaporate off the solvent and you have your pure product.

If you managed to get product separated from some but nt all of the impurities, your column was still useful. In this case I suggest you try a different purification method since sometimes certain impurities cause recrystallisations to perform poorly. You can also try a short silica plug or even another column using a different solvent system.

To clean out your column, you can just let it run dry by blowing nitrogen through until the silica no longer sticks to the walls. The silica can then be emptied into the waste. If you wish to reuse the silica, simply wash through with a good solvent (make sure nothing is stuck to the baseline, however). Wash with petroleum spirits to remove the washing solvent and you can close it up with a stopper on it to keep it pre-wetted if you wish. Due to lack of space, I don't often keep columns. I also don't often manage to get the silica clean enough to make it worth keeping.

Further instructions on cleaning can be found in my [how to clean](https://stephen13f.github.io/general/2024/04/12/washing.html) post.

Have fun; don't let the column run dry!\
Stephen