---
layout: post
title:  "DCVC"
subtitle: ""
date:   2024-04-11 17:30:00 +1000
author: "Stephen Franzese"
categories: work-up
tag: work-up
---

DCVC (dry column vacuum chromatography) is essentially a variation of the standard 'flash' column chromatography that uses finer silica to achieve better resolution and separation. It is a very broad label and the exact process used can be varied depending on your situation. Essentially, the DCVC silica is packed into a glass frit which has a vacuum spout. The solvent is then pulled through the column by vacuum rather than being pushed down by nitrogen like it is in a flash column.

There are two ends of the DCVC 'spectrum': plugs and columns. In the 'plug' style (what I refer to as a short silica plug), the silica acts as essentially a large piece of filter paper whereby insoluble solids or polar impurities will remain stuck to the upper layers while the desired material will elute. I use this style a lot when I purify Suzukis, particularly to remove palladium black. The 'column' style is more like typical column chromatography where you try to separate out several bands and collect each one as a fraction, varying the solvent gradient incrementally for each fraction. You can sort of blend these two forms together or switch between the two.

The most important feature, other than the use of finer silica, is that the column can run dry with little-to-no repercussions. This makes changing solvents easier since you can let the column run entirely dry before switching, but also because you can make larger changes in solvent polarity/ratios without the column cracking.



So the thing with DCVC is that you can decide on the fly whether you want to make it more "plug-like" or "column-like", and this is a sliding scale rather than a binary choice (hell, even in the same purification you can switch between different modes). This is actually one of its best features in terms of saving time, effort and solvent. With flash this is not nearly as easily done because the column *must* stay wet, so for example switching eluent takes longer and must be done in more incremental steps, lest you crack the packed silica. And with a bit of luck (and synthesis planning and optimization), you don't often have two major spots on TLC which are extremely close to each other, so you basically opt for an "enhanced plug" 95% of the time. If you really *do* need powerful resolution, then you do the whole shebang collecting fractions and varying the gradient incrementally per fraction. Actually, I could have sworn we did one of these more careful columns together.

When I did DCVC, I used a 60 mL fritted filter funnel which was about 6-7 cm tall from the frit. I'd pack it up with DCVC silica and abundant tapping/pressing with a teflon rod until it had a height of about 5 cm (the exact height doesn't matter as long as there's space for your loaded substrate and a bit extra empty space to pool solvent on top). From memory this is about 20-25 g of silica (I measured the value just once or twice so I had an idea of how much was in there). Then I'd place a filter paper on top and pour in ~50-100 mL of pet spirits all at once under vacuum, and let it pull through until the meniscus was *just* about to reach the top of the filter paper, at which point I would swiftly kill the vacuum and pull the hose, but not so instantaneously as to dislodge the silica on the frit from the sudden inrush of atmospheric pressure. I would then pull the filter paper out and leave it on the side for a moment, place the silica loaded with crude, put the filter paper on top again, and in one motion pull the vacuum again as I added ~50-100 mL of pet spirits. I would then start the DCVC proper. This setup was fine for purifying ~200-500 mg of crude dry-loaded onto 2 g of flash silica (the minimum amount of loading silica I would recommend for a column this width - any less and you risk not fully covering the area and getting patchy and uneven elution) with an Rf difference of 0.05-0.10 around Rf 0.3. For larger Rf differences, I would be comfortable separating more crude, up to a limit of about 2 g of crude loaded onto 3x the mass of flash silica (I recommend generally not using less than 3x the mass of silica, otherwise there may not be enough silica surface area to adsorb all the crude). If I needed a bigger column, I would use a 125 mL fritted filter funnel, which from memory fit around 50-60 g of silica, and was typically best suited for a DCVC with around 1-5 g of crude depending again on the separation needed. I've done bigger DCVCs with full chromatographic separation, up to ~15 g, but at that point it's a lot of work regardless (flash at this scale is ridiculous, mind you), and I really would hope that at such scales you would have alternative means of purification available to you, like distillation or crystallization.

In my case, I did dry-loading on flash silica almost exclusively. This helps retain polar impurities and palladium crud on the baseline, which is often what I wanted. This does generally come with a sacrifice in resolution, though, because a band eluted off loaded silica will typically be thicker than the band achievable for a same amount of material loaded on celite. If you have a difficult separation, then loading on celite may help. Unfortunately you need to use quite a lot of celite (I've heard at least 10x the mass of crude is desirable), and the height of the celite layer will likely be comparable to the height of the silica used in the column, so you may need a longer filter funnel (we had a few 20 cm long filter funnels in the lab).

As to why I try to keep the column wet even when DCVC allows you to run it dry, it comes down to the fact that bands eluting off the column become distorted in the last half-cm or so, right where the packed silica contacts the glass frit with a vacuum on the other side. This is a bit of an engineering issue rather than a chemical one, and I don't know how to fully avoid it. A column which is fully wetted (like flash) doesn't suffer this as much, but one which dries with every fraction can compound this issue, leading to bent bands forming a lenticular shape where the areas closest to the walls elute faster than the bands in the middle. This is something you will notice if you elute a highly coloured band - watch how it stains different areas of the underside of the frit in stages as you're running the column. All this said, you still can *choose* to allow the column to run dry between fractions, and doing so will generally not ruin your separation while making the process much more convenient.

Ultimately, you use whichever method you're most comfortable with. I definitely think DCVC has a steeper difficulty curve than flash at the start, and it's especially difficult for someone who already is comfortable with flash to abandon it and start fresh with a different process. But DCVC also has a higher skill ceiling, and with practice you can consistently achieve better results than flash (if for no reason other than it makes use of finer silica, which is impractically slow with flash). Unfortunately, except for plug-like separations, DCVC is probably not better than an autocolumn, which is the real solution to this predicament.

Also, if you're doing a purification with coloured bands and you know for sure what band you want, then yeah, don't bother collecting fractions until your material is about to come out, at which point you can choose to either collect it whole as a single fraction of obtain multiple fractions just in case there's a less obvious impurity partially coeluting with it. There's just no point to collection fractions you'll know you'll discard anyway, unless you plan to characterize the byproduct or something. Basically, consider yourself lucky whenever you can follow your band on a column with visible light or a 365 nm torch - that is definitely not the general case, and you have to collect dozens of fractions blindly instead, then do a bunch of TLC to check the fractions.